---
layout: post
title: "Machine Learning - Basic Statistics"
categories: machine_learning
---

Essential tools for data analysis.

## Probabilites

### Sample Space

**Def**: *A sample space $$\Omega$$ is the set of all possible outcomes of a 
random experiment.*

$$\Omega$$ can be finite or infinite.

Examples:

1. The set of all possible outcomes of a dice roll. $$\Omega = \{1,2,3,4,5,6\}$$.
2. Pages of a book opened randomly. $$\Omega = \{1,2,\dots n_{pages}\}$$.
3. Real numbers for temperature, location, time, etc. $$\Omega \in \mathbb{R}$$.

### Events

**Def**: *An event $$A$$ is a **subset** of the sample space $$\Omega$$.*

$$A$$ can be finite or infinite.

Examples:

1. \\( A = \\{1,2,3,4\\} \\)
2. $$A =$$ *"Book open at an odd number page"*
3. \\(a \leq A \leq b;a \in \mathbb{R}, b \in \mathbb{R}\\)

### Probability

**Def**: *A probability $$P(A)$$ is the chance that the event $$A$$
happens. $$P(A)$$ is a function that maps the event $$A$$ onto the interval $$[0,1]$$.*

It can be viewed as the **ratio** of the subspace $$A$$ over the entire space
of events $$\Omega$$.

### Kolmogorov Axioms

1. Non-negativity: $$P(A) \geq 0$$ for each $$A$$ event.
2. Unit measure: \\(P(\Omega) = 1 \\).
3. $$\sigma$$-additivity: For disjoint sets (events) $$A_i$$, we have
$$P(\cup^{\infty}_{i=1} A_i) = \sum^{\infty}_{i=1} P(A_i)$$.

Consequences:

* \\(P(\emptyset) = 0\\)
* \\(P(A \cup B) = P(A) + P(B) - P(A \cap B)\\)
* \\(P(A^c) = 1 - P(A)\\)

### Random Variables

**Def**: A real valued random variable $$X$$ is a **function** of the outcome of a 
randomized experiment

$$X : \Omega \rightarrow \mathbb{R}$$

- $$P(a < X < b) \doteq P(\omega : a < X(\omega) < b)$$
- $$P(X = a) \doteq P(\omega : X(\omega) = a)$$

## Discrete Distributions

### Bernoulli distribution: $$Ber(p)$$
The Bernoulli distribution is the probability distribution of a random variable
which takes the value $$1$$ with success probability of $$p$$ and the value $$0$$
with failure probability of $$1-p$$.

$$ \Omega = \{ \omega_1, \omega_2\} \quad X(\omega_1) = 1 \quad X(\omega_2) = 0$$

$$P(X = a) = P(\omega : X(\omega) = a) = 
\begin{cases}
	p, &\quad \text{if } a=1\\
	1-p, &\quad \text{if } a=0\\
\end{cases}$$

### Binomial distribution: $$Bin(n, p)$$
The Binomial distribution is the discrete probability distribution of the 
number of successes in a sequence of $$n$$ independent Bernoulli experiment.

$$ \Omega = \{\text{possible } n\text{-long } \omega_1/\omega_2 \text{ series}\}, \vert\Omega\vert = 2^n\\
K(\omega) = \text{number of }\omega_1 \text{ in } \omega \in \Omega$$

$$P(K=k) = P(\omega : K(\omega)=k)= \displaystyle\sum_{\omega :K(\omega)=k} p^k (1-p)^{n-k} = \binom{n}{k} p^k (1-p)^{n-k}$$

## Continuous Distributions


